Structure[edit]


 


The gizzard (serial 8) of a pigeon, seen at the right of the duodenum between the legs.
In birds[edit]

Birds swallow food and store it in their crop if necessary. Then the food passes into their glandular stomach, also called the proventriculus, which is also sometimes referred to as the true stomach. This is the secretory part of the stomach. Then the food passes into the gizzard (also known as the muscular stomach or ventriculus). The gizzard can grind the food with previously swallowed stones and pass it back to the true stomach, and vice versa. In layman's terms, the gizzard 'chews' the food for the bird as it does not have teeth to chew food the way humans do. Bird gizzards are lined with a tough layer made of the carbohydrate-protein complex koilin, to protect the muscles in the gizzard. 

By comparison, while in birds the stomach occurs in the digestive tract prior to the gizzard, in grasshoppers the gizzard occurs prior to the stomach, while in earthworms there is only a gizzard, and no stomach. 

Gizzard stones[edit]

Some animals that lack teeth will swallow stones or grit to aid in fragmenting hard foods. All birds have gizzards, but not all will swallow stones or grit. Those that do employ the following method of chewing: 
"A bird swallows small bits of gravel that act as 'teeth' in the gizzard, breaking down hard food such as seeds and thus helping digestion." (Solomon et al., 2002).
These stones are called gizzard stones or gastroliths and usually become round and smooth from the polishing action in the animal's stomach. When too smooth to do their required work, they may be excreted or regurgitated. 

Animals with gizzards[edit]

Fish[edit]

The mullet (Mugilidae) found in estuarine waters worldwide, and the gizzard or mud shad, found in freshwater lakes and streams from New York to Mexico, have gizzards. The gillaroo (Salmo stomachius), a richly colored species of trout found in Lough Melvin, a lake in the north of Ireland, has a gizzard which is used to aid the digestion of water snails, the main component of its diet. 

Reptiles[edit]

Alligators and crocodiles also have gizzards. 

Earthworms[edit]

Earthworms also have gizzards. 

Birds[edit]

All birds have gizzards. The gizzards of emus, turkeys, chickens, parrots, and ducks are most notable in cuisine (see below). 

Crustaceans[edit]


 


Body structure of a typical crustacean – krill
Some crustaceans have a gizzard although this is usually referred to as a gastric mill.[2] 

Non-avian dinosaurs[edit]

Dinosaurs that are believed to have had gizzards based on the discovery of gizzard stones recovered near fossils include: 
Psittacosaurus
Massospondylus
Sellosaurus
Omeisaurus
Apatosaurus
Barosaurus
Dicraeosaurus
Seismosaurus

The belief that Claosaurus had a gizzard has been discredited on the grounds that the fossil remains this claim was based on were another species and the stones merely from a stream.[3] 

Pterosaurs[edit]

At least some pterosaurs seemingly had gizzards. The most notable cases are Pterodaustro (inferred via gastroliths) and Rhamphorhynchus (directly preserved).[4][5] 
